---
layout: post
title: What is the sectoral composition of employment in India?		
date: 2012-10-11 21:29
author: Aaditya Dar
comments: true
categories: [Labour, MOSPI, NIC, NSSO, unorganized sector]
---
<p style="text-align: justify;">If you were to consider a simple dual sector classification of industry groups in India, so that workers can either be working in either (a) agriculture and allied activities, or the (b) non-agriculture sector then you can observe a clear contrast in the composition of labour force. While some people may not be surprised to find that the agriculture sector is predominantly concentrated in rural India, it is interesting to note the the agricultural sector employs women labourers more intensively. On the other hand, the non-agricultural sector is mostly urban and comprises of relatively more males.</p>
<p style="text-align: justify;">The following table (taken from the NSS report on informal sector) details the distribution of workers:</p>
<p style="text-align: justify;"><iframe src="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/pub?key=0Atw08mnxUvF9dG52WFp1ejNSU1J0Sm9ESW42bVZMU1E&amp;output=html&amp;widget=true" frameborder="0" width="575" height="375"></iframe></p>
<p style="text-align: justify;">Click <a href="http://goo.gl/f8ahv" target="_blank">here</a> to view spreadsheet in separate tab. (To download the data click on the link and go to "File"&gt; "Download as")</p>
<p style="text-align: justify;">If you are wondering what goes into making of the agricultural sector, then the short and less boring answer is that it comprises of activities such as growing crops, farming of animals, forestry, fishing and service activities related to these. Non-agriculture sector is everything that is not considered in the above definition. The technical answer is that NIC groups 011 [growing of crops; market gardening; horticulture] and 013 [growing of crops combined with farming of animals (mixed farming)] form the agricultural sector (also known as AGGC); NIC groups 012 [farming of animals], 014 [agricultural and animal husbandry service activities, except veterinary activities], 015 [hunting, trapping and game propagation including related service activities], division 02 [forestry, logging and related service activities] and division 05 [fishing] form what is called the AGEGC sector ([ag]ricultural sector [e]xcluding only [g]rowing of [c]rops, market gardening, horticulture and growing of crops combined with farming of animals); and NIC division 10-99 form the non-agriculture sector. Note: I have clubbed AGGC and AGEGC when making the dual sector comparison. Also, note that the NIC classification referred above is the old one [<a title="NIC 2004" href="https://docs.google.com/open?id=0B9UieF1jpR7DdTlDLUp6UnFPTWM" target="_blank">link to NIC 2004</a>]. I do so to maintain consistency with the NSS report [<a title="NSS 539-Report on informal sector" href="https://docs.google.com/open?id=0B9w08mnxUvF9bVNZd0F1SmhRUkk" target="_blank">Link to report 539</a>]. If you want to use a NIC classification please refer to the latest one here [<a title="NIC 2008" href="https://docs.google.com/open?id=0B9UieF1jpR7DV1d2bVNuZ0VGcmc" target="_blank">Link to NIC 2008</a>].</p>
<p style="text-align: justify;"></p>
