---
layout: post
title: Learner Achievement Survey		
date: 2012-03-17 07:02
author: Aaditya Dar
comments: true
categories: [Uncategorized]
---
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) periodically conducts Learner Achievement Surveys. Todate NCERT has completed two rounds of Learner Achievement Surveys in all subjects for classes III, V and VII/VIII. NCERT has commenced the third round of Learner Achievement Survey, and has completed the same in respect of class V. In addition, the Programme Evaluation Organisation (PEO) of the Planning Commission had conducted an evaluation of the SSA programme in 2010, which points to significant improvement in access and enrolment, as well as social and gender equity in enrolment. The study has also pointed out that there has been moderate improvement in the pupil teacher ratio and availability of infrastructure. The quality of learning, however, varies considerably between states. Further, the implementation of the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA), which is the country’s flagship programme for elementary education is subjected to bi-annual joint reviews by SSA’s Development Partners, namely the World Bank, DFID and European Commission along with nominees of the Government of India. To-date 15 Joint Review Missions have been held.

The Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009 has become operative with effect from 1st April, 2010, and the SSA Framework of Implementation has been revised to correspond with the provisions of the RTE Act, 2009. SSA provides for several interventions to improve the quality of elementary education, including inter alia opening new schools, recruiting additional teachers, periodic in-service teacher training, provision of textbooks and uniforms, regular academic support for learning enhancement to teachers. Further, the Government has issued an Advisory to State Governments on the implementation of section 29 of the RTE Act for initiating curriculum reform, including, (i) formulating age-appropriate curricula and syllabi in keeping with the National Curriculum Framework (NCF) -2005, (ii) maintaining subject balance, (iii) initiating textbook contents and production reform, (iv) ensuring continuous and comprehensive assessment for learning.

At the secondary level, the Central Board of Secondary Education has introduced the scheme of Continuous and Comprehensive Evaluation (CCE) in its schools in a phased manner for improvement of quality in the schools affiliated to it, the Board has also made Class X Board Examination optional for the students studying in Senior Secondary Schools. Rashtriya Madhayamik Shiksha Abhiyan has been launched in 2009. Further, the Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Information and Communication Technology in Schools” was revised in 2010 to promote computer enabled learning and ICT usage in Government and Government aided secondary and higher secondary schools, and thereby enrich teaching learning processes.

(c) to (e): The private sector has a large presence in the Higher Education sector. However, private sector presence in school education is also increasing over the years. The proportion of private schools including private aided schools at primary level increased from 9.1 per cent to 14.2 per cent between 2001-02 and 2009-10, at upper primary level from 23.6 per cent to 26.9 per cent, and at secondary level from 56.5 per cent to 60.0 per cent during the same period.

